Level 0: Raw Data 
=================

Raw data collected using the TIME Observing GUI are saved
saved in netCDF files (``.nc``). Each time an observation 
is started, a new directory is created on the TIME Master 
computer in ``/data/netcdffiles/``. The directory is named
based on the unix time at the start of a the observation.
The directory will contain at a ``log.txt`` file which is 
a log of the parameters that were given to the GUI when 
initializing the observation, and one or more ``.nc`` files
containing the data for the observations. 

.. note::
  Our ``.nc`` files have a size limit, and so one observation 
  may be split across multiple files. The loading utilities
  in the ``netCDF4`` package and the ``timesoft.get_data``
  will combine these files into a single data structure 
  automatically.

We refer to these raw data files as **level 0** of our 
data. They contain information from the telescope, the 
K-mirror, and the detectors, as well as some metadata.
However, the sampling rates for the telescope and detector
data are different. These data require some processing
in order to generate timestreams with consistent timing.
These tasks are handled by ``raw.get_data``,
and also wrapped in the initialization of 
``timestreams.Timestream`` class instances 

See the ``raw`` :doc:`documentation <raw>`
for details on loading the **level 0** data and structure
of the netCDF files.

Contents of the netCDF Files
----------------------------

When a netCDF file has been loaded as a dataset using 
``netCDF4.MFDataset``, the variables in netCDF files 
can be accessed using keys as ``data_file.variable['var_name']`` 
where ``var_name`` is replaced by the name of the variable
to be accessed.

The netCDF files generated by the TIME data acquisition
software contain variables related to a number of different
processes, including data acquisition input parameters, 
telescope telemetry, housekeeping, detector readout, and
K-mirror status.

.. note::

   For most variables describing timestreams (detector readings,
   telemetry, etc.), the files are created by stacking groups of
   100 (for detectors) or 20 (for telescope) readouts. So
   data arrays will have two indices corresponding to time -
   the first will be of variable length, indexing a group and
   the second will be of fixed length, indexing the position in
   the list of redouts.

.. note::

   The structure of the netCDF data files is being updated
   prior to the Fall 2022 observing run. Some of these 
   variables may be altered in future data.

Header Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following collection of variables constitute header 
information for the observation. Most of them are generated
from the inputs given to the GUI when initializing the 
observation.

.. note::

   Major updates to these variables are planned prior to the
   Fall 2022 observing run.

.. note::

   Due to a bug in the GUI software, many of these header values
   are incorrect for data from the Spring 2022 engineering run.
   Most information can be recovered from the ``log.txt`` files 
   associated with each observation.

observer : str
   Initials of the observer, as specified in the GUI
datamode : str
   The mode for data acquisition, as specified in the GUI
rc : int
   The number of readout cards used, as specified in the GUI
datetime : str
   Date-time string indicating the start of the observation
detector : int
   The number of working detectors during the observation
frames : int
   The number of data acquisition frames included in the file

Housekeeping Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The following are output by the housekeeping computer and relate
to sensor readouts and the timing of MCE readouts. 

hk_time : ndarray
   An array of shape (var, 2, 100) containing timing information.
   ``hk_time[:,0,:]`` is the unix time and ``hk_time[:,1,:]`` is
   the corresponding sync box number. The unix time is sparsely 
   sampled with only ~1 value in 100 filled and the remaining 
   entries as ``np.nan``. Linear interpolation between the points 
   with values can allow the matching of the other synch numbers 
   to actual times.
hk_data : ndarray
   An array of shape (var, 100, 252) containing sensor readouts.
   Most values are ``np.nan`` except when readout from a given 
   sensor is provided at a given timestep, in which case the 
   readout value is given.
   
   .. note::
      Which of the 252 entries for a given time correspond to which
      sensor is documented, but we do not currently know where - 
      this will need to be tracked down at some point. We believe
      Jon Hunacek has this information.

Detector Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Various information related to the detectors' status and 
readouts is stored in the following variables. Each MCE
(MCE 0 and MCE 1) has its own set of information.

.. note::

   Through the Spring 2022 engineering run, only MCE 0 was
   in use and so the MCE 1 arrays will not contain useful
   data

mce0_raw_data_all, mce1_raw_data_all : ndarray
   Arrays of shape (var, 33, 32, 100) containing the raw data
   from each detector. The second and third indices correspond
   to individual detectors organized using the row-column layout.
   So the data for the MCE 0 detector in row 1, column 5 can be 
   accessed ``mce0_raw_data_all[:,1,5,:]``.
mce0_header, mce1_header : ndarray
   Arrays of shape (var, 1700, 1). There are in fact 17 different 
   variables stored in the header for each MCE, the first index 
   corresponds to chunks of 100 samples, the second index is a 
   set of 17 header variables x 100 samples per chunk. To more
   conveniently access the data by indexing the variable you 
   want, you can reshape the array: ``mce0_header = mce0_header.reshape(-1,17,100)``.
   The variables in the header, by index, are:

   0. _footer_size
   1. _header_size
   2. _rc_present
   3. address0_ctr
   4. aux_channel
   5. data_rate
   6. frame_counter
   7. header_version
   8. num_rows
   9. num_rows_reported
   10. ramp_addr
   11. ramp_value
   12. row_len
   13. runfile_id
   14. status
   15. sync_box_num
   16. userfield

   Most of these are not used in the data analysis code we have
   written so far, however the ``sync_box_num`` is the sync box
   number, which is used to determine the timestamp associated
   with each piece of data.

   .. note::

      Many of these variables are constant for a whole observation,
      we are in the process of restructuring this variable to 
      report them only once and save space.

mce0_on_off, mce1_on_off : ndarray
   Arrays of shape (var, 33, 32) containing ones or zeros. The value 
   of ``mce0_on_off[rdout,r,c]`` indicates whether the detector in 
   row ``r`` and column ``c`` was on or off during the time of readout 
   number ``rdout``. 

   .. note::

      The on/off values of a given detector reported here will not
      change in the course of an observation, so ``mce0_on_off[0,:,:]``
      should be the only part of the array you need. We are in the
      process of revising this variable to save space.

Telescope Telemetry Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The telescope sends packets of telemetry information back to the 
data acquisition GUI. These data are sampled at a different rate
from the detector and housekeeping data, and so need to be 
interpolated to match the timing of other data.

tel : ndarray
   Array of shape (var,20,21). The final index access one of 21
   pieces variables sent by the telescope. 

   0.  blanking - 0 if the telescope is turning around, 1 if it
       scanning across the defined map.
   1.  direction - 0 if telescope is not on source, 1 if telescope
       is tracking field center, 2 if telescope is tracking in the
       -RA direction, 3 if telescope is tracking in the +RA direction
       4 if telescope is turning around
   2.  observing - True if data is being taken (as this is handled
       by the TIME data acquisiton software, not the telescope, 
       this variable may be meaningless).
   3.  empty
   4.  ut - UTC time stamp
   5.  lst - local siderial time (the RA presently transiting) 
       timestamp
   6.  deltaT - time since last telescope packet was sent
   7.  mapra - the location of the map center (R.A.). Be aware that
       in the documentation provided by the ARO staff this is called 
       cur_ra, however we have found that cur_ra and mapra are swapped
       in index relative to the information sheet we were given.
   8.  mapdec - the location of the map center (declination). Be aware that
       in the documentation provided by the ARO staff this is called 
       cur_dec, however we have found that cur_dec and mapdec are swapped
       in index relative to the information sheet we were given.
   9.  cur_ra - the current location of the telescope (R.A.)
   10. cur_dec - the current location of the telescope (declination)
   11. raoff - the offset between current and reference positions. 
       (``mapra - raoff = cur_ra``)
   12. decoff - the offset between current and reference positions. 
       (``mapdec - decoff = cur_dec``)
   13. az - the current telescope azimuth
   14. el - the current telescope elevation
   15. azvelcmd - the commanded azimuth slew rate
   16. elvelcmd - the commanded velocity slew rate
   17. azvelact - the actual azimuth slew rate (this may be mislabeled)
   18. elvelact - the actual elevation slew rate (this may be mislabeled)
   19. para - the paralactic angle of the telescope
   20. unix - the unix timestamp of the data

K-Mirror Telemetry Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Information about the K-mirror system is also saved in 
the netCDF files. This data is kept in:

kms : ndarray
   A (var, 20, 4) array of K-mirror readouts. This is
   not fully implemented yet, but will eventually be an
   array of flags about the K-mirror status.

.. note::

   Major updates to these variables are planned for some
   point in the future.
